Explanation ("Planet" series CDs, ModelBank) :


Thanks for reading all this well through so as to avoid any
unnecessary misunderstandings - the first and second parts should be read
before installation, the part about possible problems and how to
avoid them can well be dealt with later or whenever need be.

If you are a rather inexperienced user, you will find
the following very beneficial - veterans with more than
ten years in 3d will definitely master all difficulties anyway (or not encounter any)
and thus should be able to take this in at a gaze - for them,
our little essay should be regarded as mere additional information.

Please also mind that many models of our collection were made 
with 3dsMax or other special application in mind, and their use
in other programs will be somewhat more complicated in spite of
our format conversion efforts - this can앖 be helped, but we do
offer you the original files for free if you ever decide
to switch over to Max or acquire a copy as an addition
to the software you are already using.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


1) General - how to use :

First, welcome to the universe of "Planet" and "ModelBank"
CD/DVD collections - as opposed to other collections now available 
we strive to furnish useful models (rather than collector압 items),
at affordable pricing.
We are constantly reworking and upgrading models, you may find
test models and textures on your cds which are part of a future 
or developing project - no reason that you shouldn앖 use them 
yet even as prototypes, a full year of free updates being yours.

Rather than supplying an expensive catalogue which would force us
to raise prices and most likely reprint every year, we add pictures which
serve the same purpose with the help of simple 2d (and 3d) browsing tools.

We suggest that you create a ModelBank folder of your own
on your computer, streamlined for your use and not as bulky
as our collection.

CacheForce cd libraries are pretty self-explanatory  :
for overview purposes, most folders have one or several
.jpg-thumbnail pictures - their names start with a "+"
(+people_dresses1.jpg etc.) and are easy to find and look at.
However model updates are often faster than thumbnail updates,
it is essential that you use a 3d browsing utility like
"3d Browser" (see "software" in the expolanation folder).
This little program can also be efficiently used for polygon 
reduction, it has one of the best algorithms around.

Textures are mostly within the object folders,
but there is an extra "texture" folder as well.

On ModelBank CD or DVD collections, to economize space,
several files that belong within two "Planet" CD collections at once,
i.e. military characters are to be found among the characters
of Planet People under "dressed people" and so on.
The historical tanks we could add to the collection
thanks to our russian friend Oleg Pomoshnikov, to be found in their 
original zipped state.

Landscape/texObjects : these are squares (.3ds) with high resolution images
of plants and landscape elements. You can use them in realistic architectural
visualization renders where high res polygonal plants would
only overload the scenes. Careful lighting is a must 
when using these objects.


2) Added Software :

In the "Software" folder you will find the format conversion software
"3dExploration", which also comes in handy for viewing,
or if you have trouble loading a file maybe. 

For modeling, animation and raytracing, we added "Cybermotion",
which may not impress 3dsMax or Lightwave users overmuch
but is certainly worth looking at for those who are exclusively using a CAD 
software parcel or Poser.

Cybermotion and 3dExplorer are shareware - please look at the websites
of their respective makers and register the soft if you like it -
all the programs added here have been chosen for their good money value.



3) Known or possible incompatibilities or other problems : 

Our libraries have been added to by artists from all over the planet,
and quite naturally they used a score of programs to create them -
though we did our best to clean up incompatibilities,
this hasn`t always been a hundred percent possible.

- Through format conversion material colors may sometimes look dull or even black,
mostly because specularity will be set back through conversion, in many cases.
Format conversion software may use these states as default states,
while in some programs a user might scoff at their looks -
please be aware that for most models, you only need to choose new colors
to your own software (and to your own taste) and that it is usually quite unnecessary
to employ any bitmap texture to render, say, a car - if not for just a reflection
map like a sky picture if you fancy that.

- The 3ds default format is unreliable in keeping vertex normals
the way they belong (all models except the bone/ik human characters
have to be converted to/from 3ds.

- Lightwave압 interesting file structure makes objects somewhat hard to find 
in a normally very suitable file structure even with a browsing tool. 
Also, human modelers who create complex models often use very similar names to denominate
small subobjects (or even the same one twice as it may happen to tyres of a car,
which are all the same objects duplicated several times of course) and while that is no problem
in any known 3d software, it surprisingly turn into one during Lightwave conversion,
when such objects are frequently overwritten and thus don앖 appear at all
in the resulting Lightwave scene file - such bugs are unfortunately very hard to sort ou,
especially in models which contain dozens or hundreds od subobjects.

- Multimaterial uv-textures are frequently impossible to get from one program to another.
If you find normals pointing the wrong way be assured we already corrected
that but our efforts got frustrated through the conversion process -
please if possible correct that and RESAVE the model in your own version and format,
which will certain resolve the problem for the duration.

- Lightwave knows two ways of saving models, as a complex scene file
and as a one-object-model (this preferred by many users in the case of 
a simple object like pieces of furniture) - however we save the
more complex scene files and give out a free 3ds version to any CD customer on request.
You can import 3ds files in Lightwave and usually get the same effect
as if you load a "single object" Lightwave file.

- Further examples for unwanted difficulties are scaling (this just has to be
corrected by the end user sometimes as only he will know in which way his
import filter scales) and, once again, polygon normals - on "Planet Interior" (object names
starting with "S3d-...), which was created by it압 maker with AutoCad (whose creators
also evolved the dxf and 3ds formats, virtually the lingua franca of 3d - see above) 
vertex normals are inconsistent, the effect can be irritating (depending on software)
but isnt`t damaging : make your program display the models two-sided in viewport
and renders. Many parcels do this as a default, however 3dsMax, Poser and 
some others do not. We are currently remodeling most of the objects in question
in nurbs, these can be found as "internurbs" in the interiors folder.
These files will grow in number, cars and anatomy will also be available
as nurbs models soon.

- Poser models can only sensibly be used in Poser
(3 to 5) - with the exception that a Maya user will be able to import
the resident Wavefront file geaometries - and they have to be installed : there are 
several files which belong in several subfolders in the Poser 
"runtime" folder. The "Planet Poser" creator put some extra explanation in the Poser folders
i.e. on the Poser cds - if you are new to Poser, please don`t miss reading that - 
Poser files simply can`t just be "loaded" !
Poser has no 3d format of it압 own but cleverly uses the Wavefront format (.obj) instead,
which is a good, reliable and human readable one.
If you want to create a Poser "prop", just rename a Wavefront model to ".pp2"
and that압 it... also, the big Poser ".rsr" files are basically just renamed ".obj" ones,
while the ".cr2" files contain the actual animation data,
which in Poser are basically vertex animations ("morphs").
The cr2 file, which loads first, holds paths to a fixed folder structure where all other needed
files must reside - the only exception being the textures.

- Compatibility can be a problem due to program versions,
as an example animated Character Studio files created in 3dsMax version 6
cannot be used by anyone using any earlier version of Max -
which many game designers do as many game engines still need Max version 4.
What we do is try to use as low a program version as possible
so as to have better compatibility, Poser 3, Max 4, Lightwave 5.6 etc.
If you have a higher version of any given program, you will be able
to load such files though your software will may critcize
a file as "obsolet" - in such a case, just resave it with your version.

- NURBS models: Since early 2004 we are substituting earlier polygonal
versions of essential models with nurbs versions, usually in IGES format.
These come in handy for software like SolidWorks and ProEngineer,
which fail to import polygons. It also enables us to finally correct problems
the polygonal sources may be having. However it is not always predictable
how the materials/colors/textures turn out in some applications and small adjustments
by the user should be an expected procedure.

- If you use a Mackintosh computer, be warned of the possiblity
that the line feed/carriage return ascii difference to the wondrous ex-MS-DOS-
now-Windows systems most of us (have to) use may make for further incompatibilities,
but that there are tools available on the net to fix all.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


If you discover any problems we aren앖 yet aware of please do not hesitate to notify us !
If you have  questions or need an update/upgrade, please contact us by Email.
If you see (at our sites) that any file has been updated within a year 
from your original purchase, just mail us and we will enable a free update.

Thanks for your attention,
Your 3DSpecial Team

vcheckers@cacheforce.com

21st Century Solutions Ltd.

http://www.cacheforce.com (libraries)
http://www.3-d-models.com (models for download)
http://www.3dspecial.com (anatomy)
